# Testing with `jest`
Jest is a testing framework curated by Facebook. Though Jest is typically used for testing React components, it can also be used as a general testing tool for other purposes. It comes bundled with `create-react-app`, so getting started with testing is easy.

Tests should conform to a consistent file naming structure of ` .test.js`. For example, if you want to test the file `App.js`, the test file should be `App.test.js`. When you run tests, `App.test.js` will be included as part of the tests.

To run tests from the command line, `create-react-app` provides a utility script that will run all tests:
```js
npm test
```

However, if you want to run only one test file, pass the path to that file:
```js
npm test ./path/to/file/
```

React/Redux applications have lots of moving parts, so this article discusses testing of some of the most common elements by adding tests to the clock-time application.

## Matchers
Jest uses "matchers" to let you test values. Matchers are a way to assert that you had the expected outcome in your tests.

View a full list of matchers [here](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/expect)

### Common Matchers
Here is a description of some of the most common matchers used when testing expected outcomes.

* `.toBe()` - uses Object.is, which is a new ES2015 feature, to test exact equality. This behavior differes from the `===` comparison. [Equality Comparisons and Sameness Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Equality_comparisons_and_sameness)
* `.toEqual()` - compares recursively all properties of object instances (also known as "deep" equality)

> NOTE: `.toBe()` and `.toEqual()` work the same for number values

* `.toBeNull()` -  matches only null
* `.toBeUndefined()` - matches only undefined
* `.toBeDefined()` - is the opposite of toBeUndefined
* `.toBeTruthy()` - matches anything that an if statement treats as true
* `.toBeFalsy()` - matches anything that an if statement treats as false
* `.toBeGreaterThan()` - matches if number is grather than another number
* `.toBeGreaterThanOrEqual()` - matches if a number is less than or equal to another number
* `.toBeLessThan()` - matches if number is less than another number
* `.toBeLessThanOrEqual()` - matches if number is less than or equal to another number
* `.toBeCloseTo()` - For floating point equality, use `.toBeCloseTo()`. This will ensure a test doesn't fail due to a rounding error.
* `.toMatch()` - Checks a string against a regular expression
* `.toContain()` - Checks if an array contains a specific value

Learn on your own! [Async Tests in Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/asynchronous)

> Note: You can also test for the opposite of a matcher by adding `.not`. If you wanted to check if something was not equal you may use `.not.toEqual()`

## Testing Actions
Jest structures tests into groups called "suites." A suite is a collection of assertions that test a common piece of code. That piece of code could be a component, a class, an action, a reducer, etc. The first suite we write will test an Action Creator. Our application has only one Action Creator `updateTime()`. Because Action Creators are simple functions that return objects, this test is relatively simple.

Create a new file called `index.test.js` within the `actions` folder. Copy the following test code into that file.

### .src/actions/index.test.js
```js
import * as actions from './index'

describe('actions', () => {
  it('should return action to update time', () => {
    const expectedAction = {
      type: 'UPDATE_TIME'
    }
    expect(actions.updateTime()).toEqual(expectedAction)
  })
})
```

Import the action(s) you will test in the suite.

The `describe( name, fn )` method wraps the suite. It gets passed two values. The first value is a string that describes the suite. The second value is a function that runs all of the tests for the suite.

The `it( name, fn )` function wraps each test in the suite. Like describe, it is passed a string description of the test and a callback function which describes the test logic.

This test evaluates whether the Action Creator returns the correct action object. In this case, we create a mock action "expectedAction" which we compare with the return value of `updateTime().`

Jest has a series of functions that are used to inspect our code and to do comparisons and analysis of our code. This test utilizes `expect()` and `toEqual()`. `expect()` captures the output of `updateTime()` and `isEqual()` compared that value with our mock Action `expectedAction`. If the comparison fails, then the function returns false. If the objects match, then it returns true.

```js
expect( actions.updateTime() ).toEqual( expectedAction )
```

Now run your test:

```bash
npm test
```

The console should display a message similar to this- assuming the test passed.
```bash
 PASS  src/actions/index.test.js
  actions
    ✓ should return action to update time (3ms)

Test Suites: 1 passed, 1 total
Tests:       1 passed, 1 total
Snapshots:   0 total
Time:        0.934s, estimated 1s
Ran all test suites matching /./src/actions/.
```

## Testing Reducers
To test a reducer, import the reducer(s), then simulate expected results, similar to how the action tests were structured. This suite has two tests. The first test is designed to evaluate the initial state of the application.

For the first test, pass `undefined` to the reducer, forcing the reducer to use the default value for the application state. Since `undefined` doesn't match an `action.type` reducer, the default state of `{}` is returned.

For the second test, pass the reducer a `UPDATE_TIME` Action, causing the reducer to generate a new date formatted with `toLocaleTimeString().` That generated value is then compared with the current time (similarly formatted).

```js
// clock.test.js
import reducer from './clock'

describe('clock reducer', () => {
  it('should return the initial state', () => {
    expect(reducer(undefined, {})).toEqual({})
  })

  it('should handle UPDATE_TIME', () => {
    expect(
      reducer({}, {
        type: 'UPDATE_TIME'
      })
    ).toEqual({
        time: new Date().toLocaleTimeString()
    })
  })
})
```

Run this test.

```js
npm test ./src/reducers
```

If all is well, expect a similar output.

```js
 PASS  src/reducers/clock.test.js
  clock reducer
    ✓ should return the initial state (3ms)
    ✓ should handle UPDATE_TIME (3ms)

Test Suites: 1 passed, 1 total
Tests:       2 passed, 2 total
Snapshots:   0 total
Time:        0.533s, estimated 1s
Ran all test suites matching /./src/reducers/
```

## Component Testing
[`enzyme`](https://github.com/airbnb/enzyme) is the best tool for testing components. Enzyme makes it easier to assert against React components. Enzyme mimics jQuery's API, so document traversal and manipulation should feel familiar.

To install:
```bash
npm install --save-dev enzyme
```

Enzyme needs an adapter to work with React. The adapter corresponds to the version of React in the application. To install enzyme with React 16, use the following command. For all other versions, replace the number with the version of the React install.

```bash
npm install --save-dev enzyme-adapter-react-16
```

Once the dependencies are installed, create a test file for the Clock component. Create `src/components/clock/Clock.test.js` to hold the suite of tests that evaluate whether Clock is rendering the correct string.

Import all the necessary dependencies into `Clock.test.js`.

```js
import React from 'react'
import Clock from './Clock';
import Enzyme, { mount } from 'enzyme'
import Adapter from 'enzyme-adapter-react-16';
```

Now, configure `enzyme` with the React 16 adapter, so it knows which version of React it is testing.

```js
Enzyme.configure({ adapter: new Adapter() });
```

After setting the adapter, make a function `setup()` that will mount the Clock component and pass it simulated props. This process is easier to test against than going through the effort to set up Redux to pass the store and is just as effective.

In the function, make a `const` for props and set keys for `updateTime()` and `time`. For `updateTime()` we'll use `jest.fn()`. Jest uses `jest.fn()` to 'mock' functions. Mocking functions allows us to view *the behavior* of a function as opposed to the output of the function. Format `time` with `new Date().toLocaleString()`.

To mount Clock, use the mount function and store the returned component in a variable called `enzymeWrapper`.

Finally, return both props and enzymeWrapper.

```js
function setup() {

  const props = {
    updateTime: jest.fn(),
    time: new Date().toLocaleTimeString()
  }

  const enzymeWrapper = mount(
    <Clock {...props} />
  )

  return {
    props,
    enzymeWrapper
  }

}
```

Now that you've set up the props and components, write the test.

```js
import React from 'react'
import Enzyme, { mount } from 'enzyme'
import Clock from './Clock';
import Adapter from 'enzyme-adapter-react-16';

Enzyme.configure({ adapter: new Adapter() });

function setup() {
  const props = {
    updateTime: jest.fn(),
    time: new Date().toLocaleTimeString()
  }
  const enzymeWrapper = mount(
    <Clock {...props} />
  )
  return {
    props,
    enzymeWrapper
  }
}

describe('Clock component', () => {
    it('should render self and subcomponents', () => {
        const { enzymeWrapper, props } = setup()
        expect( enzymeWrapper.find( 'h2' ).text() ).toBe('It is ' + props.time + '.')
    })
})
```

Run the setup function within your test and use object destructuring to access the two output variables.

This test utilizes `expect()` and `toBe()` methods to compare the rendered value of the h2 within the Clock component with a string built from props. `toBe()` differs from `isEqual()` because it tests for exact equality between two values and `isEqual()` test the value of an object.

Now that you've written all three tests run them with `npm test`. The console should report back that all tests have passed.

```js
 PASS  src/components/clock/Clock.test.js
 PASS  src/reducers/clock.test.js
 PASS  src/actions/index.test.js

Test Suites: 3 passed, 3 total
Tests:       4 passed, 4 total
Snapshots:   0 total
Time:        0.444s, estimated 1s
```

## Conclusion
This article only scratches the surface of testing. Jest comes packed with lots of ways for testing objects, classes, function, etc. To read about the full API of Jest refer to [the documentation](https://facebook.github.io/jest/docs/en/api.html). To read more about Enzyme refer to the [Enzyme documentation](http://airbnb.io/enzyme/docs/api/).

