# Express

## What is Express?

Express is a minimal web framework for Node.js, written in JavaScript. It provides the bare minimum needed to start a web server and serve requests to multiple endpoints. Most of its functionality is provided by plugins, often referred to as middleware. We'll go further into what middleware is and writing our own in later lessons.

- Version 0.0.1 was released on Jan 3, 2010.
- Inspired by the Sinatra Ruby framework which claims similar goals.
- Express is very capable on its own, but you'll often be re-inventing the wheel. For production use, see their [list of frameworks](https://expressjs.com/en/resources/frameworks.html), built on Express.

## Anatomy of an Express App

```javascript
var express = require('express')
var app = express()

app.get('/', function (req, res) {
  res.send('Hello World!')
})

app.listen(3000, function () {
  console.log('Example app listening on port 3000!')
})
```

## Anatomy of an Express App

That is an Express app in it's most basic form. Breaking it down a little bit:

- We require the main express library.
- Initialize a new Express app by calling the ` express()`constructor.
- Create a HTTP GET route at / that responds with the text "Hello World!".
- Instruct our app to listen on port 3000, logging a success message when it's ready.

You could build your entire app in a single file, but your fellow developers would cringe and swear at your later. There are many directory structures you could choose, but the simplest is provided by the [Express Generator ](http://expressjs.com/en/starter/generator.html)which we will look at next.

## Application Boilerplate

```bash
npx express-generator --hbs my_express_app 
cd my_express_app
npm install
```

This will install the generator, create a new app scaffold, and install all dependencies.

If you run npm start from this directory and open your browser to [https://localhost:3000](https://localhost:3000/) , you should see the "Welcome to Express" text on the screen. Congratulations, that's it!

## Take a look

Open your project and take a look at the files that have been created and their structure.

Most notably, take a look at app.js. This is the file that essentially runs our entire application. Line 10 is actually initializing this application for us. 

- ## Default Code

  As you'll notice, there is some default code and files in our application. Let's walk through and build our own page.

  Express ships with a default server that we will use for development. The server will wait for http requests and respond appropriately based on our configuration.

## Routes

Express handles these requests through things called **routes**. To normal users, a route is a URL that we are used to, like: 

http://mall.com/stores

On the back-end, however, the route is a command to run a specific action on our server/application. 

The most basic example of this (and most common) is a user types in a url, that request is sent to the server as a GET request, and the server responds with a load of data (our webpage) to the browser. Other requests could use the other HTTP methods we've learned about!

A route is the specification of exactly how we make the request (url), what method the request uses (http method), and what action should run when the request is made. 

Let's look at how our Root Route is setup in Express. A Root Route is the route that maps a specific action to the homepage of the website. i.e. our root url. If our website is cnn.com, the root route would map cnn.com to a specific action. 

In our current setup, the root route already exists. Take a look at these lines in your app.js:

```
// line 7
var indexRouter = require('./routes/index');

// line 22
app.use('/', indexRouter);
```

This is requiring the routes file, index.js which holds data and structure for this route. And line 22 specifically matches the url "/" to this particular router. "/" denotes the root of our project, which makes it our root route.

Let's take a look at our routes/index.js:

```
var express = require('express');
var router = express.Router();

/* GET home page. */
router.get('/', function(req, res, next) {
  res.render('index', { title: 'Express' });
});

module.exports = router;
```

First we need to require both express and the express router.

Following this, we setup our route using the GET method, which is called using the .get router function. This function takes two parameters:

- The url we want to access the route with - in this case it's the root, so we will use "/"

- The second parameter is an anonymous function which takes three parameters:

  - Request - gives us access to the request object data 
  - Response - this object we use respond to the request
  - Next - call the next piece of middleware if we don't end the request cycle.

## Exercise: Express, MongoDB, and Mongoose
Let's set up our express application to talk to MongoDB. We do this with the help of a node package called [Mongoose](https://mongoosejs.com/).

### Setup our connection

* Install the mongoose library with `npm install mongoose --save`
* Allow our application to connect to our cookBook db on our MongoDB server

We need to import mongoose. Add the following require statement to app.js
```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose');
```

Now let's use mongoose to connect to our cookBook db
```javascript
mongoose.connect('mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/cookBook', { useNewUrlParser: true })
  .then(() => {
    console.log(`Successfully Connected to MongoDB`)
  }).catch(() => {
    console.log(`Error Connecting to the MongoDB`)
  })
```

> `mongoose.connect()` returns a promise so we can use `then` and `catch` methods to log the connection status

* Start your application with `npm start` and verify that you have successfully connected to MongoDB

### Create a mongoose schema and model
A schema defines document properties through an object where the key name corresponds to the property name in the collection. You can apply schema types to the properties that trigger validation when saving to the database. A Model is created from a schema and used to interact with documents in the collection. You call things like save and find on a model.

The following schema types are available:
* Array
* Boolean
* Buffer
* Date
* Mixed (A generic / flexible data type)
* Number
* ObjectId
* String

Create the following file `models/recipe.model.js`
```javascript
var mongoose = require('mongoose')

var recipeSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  name: String,
  author: {
    name: String,
    email: String
  },
  ingredients: [String],
  averageCost: [String]
})

const Recipe = mongoose.model('Recipe', recipeSchema)

module.exports = Recipe;
```

### Create a service to manage our recipes
We are going to need a service that allows us to perform crud operations with our recipe model.

* Create the following file `services/recipe.service.js`
* We need to import our model so we can use it to get recipes in and out of our cookBook db

```javascript
  var Recipe = require('../models/recipe.model.js')
```

* Lets create a method to get our recipes from the database

```javascript
// Let's use an Async function to get the Recipes
exports.getRecipes = async function (query) {

    //Let's create a Try and Catch function 
    //that way we have some error handling set. 
    //Waiting for the promise

    try {

        //using await to make sure the async call is complete before running the next line of code
        var recipes = await Recipe.find(query)

        //Once the Mongoose promise is returned 
        //we're going to go ahead and return 
        //the To Do List it has produced 

        return recipes;

    } catch (e) {

        //If the try didn't work we're going to 
        //go ahead and let the users know what kind of 
        //Error we have

        throw Error('Oh No! We got an error while finding your recipes, so sorry!')
    }


}
```

### Create a Recipe Controller
We are going to need to communicate with our service in response to requests from specific routes. To facilitate this communication  we are going to create a recipe controller.

* Create the following file `controllers/recipe.controller.js`
* We need to import our service so we can use it to get recipes in and out of our cookBook db

```javascript
  var RecipeService = require('../services/recipe.service.js');
```

* We need a method that gets our recipes from the service and returns them in response to a request

```javascript
exports.getRecipes = async function (req, res, next) {

    try {

        //call getRecipes on our service with {} as our query to get all the recipes
        var recipes = await RecipeService.getRecipes({})

        // Return the recipes list with the appropriate 
        //HTTP Status Code and Message.

        return res.status(200).json(recipes);

    } catch (e) {

        //Return an Error Response Message 
        //with Code and the Error Message.
        return res.status(400).json({ message: e.message });

    }
}
```

### Create a Router for our API
We need a way for routes to access our methods on our controller. To solve this problem we are going to create a recipe router.

* Create the following file `routes/api/recipe.routes.js`
* We need to import express so we can acces its `Router()` method and create our router

```javascript
var express = require('express')
var router = express.Router()
```

* Import our controller so we can use it's methods to respond to routes

```javascript
// Getting the Recipe Controller that we just created
var RecipeController = require('../../controllers/recipe.controller.js');
```

* Create a `get` route for `/` that calls our `getRecipes` method on our controller and then export our router

```javascript
// Map each API to the Controller Functions
router.get('/', RecipeController.getRecipes)


// Export the Router
module.exports = router;
```

* We ant to prefix our API related routes with `/api/` for organizational purposes. To do this we are going to create an `api.route.js` file that will allow us to include all routes that represent an api endpoint.

* Create the following file `routes/api.routes.js`
* We need to import express so we can access its `Router()` method and create our router

```javascript
var express = require('express')
var router = express.Router()
```

* We need to import our recipe routes so we can attach them to our api router

```javascript
var recipeRoutes = require('./api/recipe.routes.js')
```

* create the `/api/recipe` route that access our recipe router and export our router

```javascript
router.use('/recipe', recipeRoutes);

module.exports = router;
```

* Update our app to include our API routes on our around line 11

```javascript
// Get the API routes ...
var apiRoutes = require('./routes/api.routes')
```

* Tell our app to use the api routes on or around line 27

```javascript
app.use('/api', apiRoutes);
```

* Start your application and access your recipe route. 
  * <http://localhost:3000/api/recipe>

* You should see all your recipes

## On Your Own
Let's finish our CRUD functionality. So far we have **Read** but we are missing **Create**, **Update**, and **Delete/Destroy**

### Create
* Create a `post` route in the recipe router for the path `/`. This route should accept a JSON request body representing a recipe and persist it to the database.
  * You will need to create a **createRecipe** method in your controller to respond to the new route.
    * `req.body` is an object that represents the submitted JSON object inside your controller method.
    * this method should return the saved recipe on success with a status of 201
  * You will need to create a **createRecipe** method in your service for your controller to pass the recipe data to so it can persist it to the db.
    * This method should create a new `Recipe` model instance and populate it with the data passed from our controller. You can call the `save` method on the model to persist the data
    * On success, `save` will return the inserted record. This is an async process so consider using async/await syntax to make sure the record saved before returning the saved recipe. You should return the saved recipe

* Test this functionality with Postman

## Deleting Records
Let's create a way to delete a recipe

* Create a `delete` route in the recipe router for the path `/:id`. This route should leverage the id passed in and delete the recipe with the related `id`

```javascript
router.delete('/:id', RecipeController.deleteRecipe)
```

* You will need to create a **deleteRecipe** method in your controller to respond to the new route.
  * It will need to read the id out of the path to know what recipe to delete.

```javascript
exports.deleteRecipe = async function(req, res, next){

    //access the id from the path
    var id = req.params.id;

    try{
        var deleted = await RecipeService.deleteRecipe(id)

        //return a status of 204 and true for success
        return res.status(204).json(true)
    }catch(e){
        return res.status(400).json({ message: e.message });
    }

}
```

* You will need to create a **deleteRecipe** method in your service for your controller to pass the recipe id to so it can delete it from the db.

```javascript
exports.deleteRecipe = async function(id){
    
  // Delete the Recipe

  try{
      var deleted = await Recipe.deleteOne({_id: id})
      
      //the response for deletedOne is a success if the n property is 0
      if(deleted.n === 0){
          throw Error("Todo Could not be deleted")
      }
      return deleted
  }catch(e){
      throw Error("Error Occurred while Deleting the Recipe: " + e)
  }
}
```

* Test this functionality with Postman

## On Your Own

* Use what you have learned to create the update functionality. The route should be a `put` with a path of `/:id`

* Use what you have learned to create a route that gets a single recipe. The route should be a `get` with a path of `/:id`

* Test this functionality with Postman